Introduction to India 
By Joan Boyle 
 
Introduction: 
India is a land rich in tradition.  It is also a land of contrast.  Let’s start our 
journey through this remarkable country in southern Asia by researching 
some important baseline data. 
 
Grade Level:  
3rd grade 
 
CA Social Studies Standard 3.1   
Lesson 1 – Basic Geography 
 
Objective: 
Students will learn about the geography of India so they can compare 
and contrast it with similar regions in California . 
 
a) In your chosen grouping format (performing pairs (2), tricky trios (3) 
or questioning quads (4) use the supplied black line master of India and 
locate the towns, rivers and mountains found on the attached worksheet.  
You may search via the internet or use the supplied map of India.   
Attachment from: http://enchantedlearning.com
 
 
b) What questions do you have about these physical features?  Research 
and report some interesting facts about each geographical feature (for 
example: Himalayas or River Ganges) you placed on the map.  Use a Tree 
Thinking Map to organize your categories and information. Display your 
Tree Thinking Maps near the location of their nearest cities when you 
display the posters in the following lesson 
 
c) Now research in small groups/performing pairs one town/city and 
report on the importance of your chosen location to the economy, history or 
culture of India.  Produce a poster of your town/city including your pertinent 
information with graphics to support it.  Display the posters around the 
classroom and do a Gallery Walk to learn more about this fascinating 
country. (For example: Varanasi is know by several names and is the desired 
burial place for most Hindus.) Attach the Tree Thinking Map prepared in the 
lesson above beside the town to which it is the nearest. 
 
Lesson 2 – History of India 
 
Objective:  Students will learn about the history of India/ 
 
a) Using a timeline or log on to www.timeline.com research and input in 
chronological order, information about the rulers of this amazing 
subcontinent region, both past and present. 
 
• Guptas 
• Jawaharlal Nehru 
• The British 
• Aryans 
• Indira Gandhi 
• Moguls 
• Manmohan Singh 
• Maurya 
 
***www.Wikipedia.com is a great site 
 
b) Research one important thing that these rulers brought to India.  
 
c) After reading several books from the attached bibliography, compare 
and contrast using a Venn diagram, the colonization by the British, of India  
and the USA. 
 
Lesson 3 Hindu Deities and Festivals
 
Objective: Students will learn about cultural festivals and the gods that 
are the foundation of the Hindu faith. 
 
To be able to understand the folktales of India, one must get to know the 
important deities that envelope these stories.  One book I have enjoyed 
sharing with my students is entitled “The Little Book of Hindu Deities” by 
Sanjay Patel.  The lighthearted drawings and descriptions of the gods 
provides a fun insight into what could become an overwhelming burden to 
remember who is whom and who did what!  Here are some of my favorites, 
and probably necessary introductions so your students can get the most out 
of this unit of study.  Have your students research the answers to my 
questions and then choose another god and ask the own questions for their 
peers: 
 
Ganesha – Lord of all living things and eldest son of Shiva and his wife, 
Parvati.   
? Ganesha has the head of an animal. Do you know which one? How he got 
it? 
? Ganesha carries an axe. Do you know why? 
?Ganesha has a sweet tooth and a favorite candy.  What is it called?  
 
Shiva - one of the oldest gods in India.  He is part of the trinity of gods. 
? Who are the other two gods making up the trinity? 
? Shiva loves to dance. Some people think if he stops dancing that the world 
will come to an end!!  He carries a weapon with him always. Do you know 
what it is?  What does it represent? 
 
Brahma – the second god of the trinity.  He is the creator of the world and 
all living things upon it.  It is said that he created a goddess out of his own 
blood when he started the creation of the world. He then could not take his 
eyes off her so when ever she moved he sprouted a head so he could watch 
her in all directions. 
?How many heads does Brahma have? 
?What is the purpose of the carafe of water which he carries with him 
always,? 
 
Vishnu – the last of the trinity and his role is the protector of the universe.  
He has 10 incarnations, or avatars, which he transforms into when he comes 
to Earth to fight evil.  Buddha, Krisna and Rama are the most famous.  
?What color is Vishnu? 
?How many arms does he have? 
?On which animal does he usually sleep? 
 
Rama – The seventh avatar of Vishnu and one of the hero and one of the 
most important people in the epic tale of the Ramayana. This is one of the 
most favorite stories in India. He came to Earth to destroy the evil king 
Ravana.  He is seen as the ideal man and is worshipped daily at altars 
throughout India. 
?Who is the wife of Rama? 
?Apart from loyalty, what other symbol does he represent?  
? What is the festival called that celebrates his return to his kingdom after 
rescuing his wife from Ravana and celebrates his coronation as king? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Now it is your turn to find out more about the gods below.   
?Who are they? 
?Why are they important? 
?What are they famous for? 
 
Sita     Nagas  Hanuman    
Lakshmi    Garuda  Lakshmana 
Ganga    Sarasvati   
 
 
Lesson 4 – Literacy
 
 
Objective: Students will take information gleaned from the folktales of 
India and write/adapt  their own tales into a Reader’s Theater.  
 
CA Social Studies Standard 3.1.1 
Describe National Identities, religious beliefs, customs, and various 
folklore 
 
CA Language Arts Standard 3.2 
Comprehend basic plots of classic fairy tales, myths, folktales, legends, 
and fables from around the world. 
 
Creative writing
 
 
Make up your own god or goddess just like the ones you have read about 
today.  Be creative! Use good descriptions both in words and art. Have fun!  
Put all of your stories and creations in to a book of your own deities.  
 
a) Reading folktales from India can inform you about the culture, history 
or beliefs of this country.  Use the book titles from the bibli ography section 
complete the attached matrix which will highlight the important information 
about India. 
 
b) Writing a folktale can be fun.  By using the information your have 
learned about this country so far, write your own folktale making it as 
realistic to the culture of your chosen region of India as you can.  
 
c) Attached you will find a couple of  Indian Reader’s Theater  
websites.  Have the students use these for practice and then encourage them 
to write their own versions, or a unique one from one of  the folktale books 
they have read.  These can be performed for parents or the lower grades in 
your school. 
 
http://www.aaronshep.com/rt/RTE07.html 
http://www.aaronshep.com/rt/RTE07.html 
 
d) Show the students the attached clips of video taken in India of a 
performance of the Ramayana which is one of the popular epic stories of 
India.  Encourage the students to try and put their folktales into a mu sical 
rendition of their story.  Alternatively, they could add music to their 
Reader’s Theater plays. 
 
Research writing
 
 
Using the attached website  
 http://www.famous-india.com/people-in-india/  
or books from your library to choose one of these famous people and 
complete a biographical written sketch to share with your class.   I have 
enclosed a sample from a very famous Indian, Mohandas “Mahatma” 
Gandhi.  
 http://enchantedlearning.com 
 
 
Lesson 5 – Art
 
Objective – Students will make their own shadow puppets to use in their 
Reader’s Theater or Shadow Puppet play.  They will understand the 
complexity and popularity of this ancient form of Indian art.  
 
Diversity of the Visual Arts  
3.4 Identify and describe objects of art from different parts of the world 
observed in visits to a museum or gallery (e.g., puppets, masks, containers).  
 
3.5 Write about a work of art that reflects a student's own cultural 
background 
 
 
Background Information 
a)  Shadow puppets are very popular by way of entertainment in India 
and other countries in Southern Asia. This was more so before the advent of 
television and movies where puppeteers would travel the country peforming 
epic plays like Ramayana or Mahabharata which could take several nights  
to perform..  They are also one of the oldest art forms to be found in India 
with many oral stories being passed down from father to son. Shadow 
puppets are traditionally flat and are made from leather and held or moved 
by attached bamboo cane.  They are then lightly pressed on a translucent 
screen with a bright  
 
 Use the photographs of shadow puppets (see attachment named 
Shadow Puppets) which were taken from The Art of Puppetry picture cards I 
purchased in India and from ones that I took (with permission) in the 
museums in various parts of India., for models of puppets that your students 
can use to make for their own folktales from India. Below you will find 
directions of How to Make a Shadow Puppet.  
 
Hands on activity 
What you will need: 
Thick A4 high quality tracing paper 
Colored markers 
Variety of hole punches in different sizes 
Scissors 
Pencil 
Clear tape 
Pencil 
A laminator  (you will need strips of stiff clear plastic if you don’t ha ve a 
laminator) 
An overhead projector and clear A4 OHP sheets (or a strong desk lamp and 
a sheet of white cotton or thin white paper such as blank newsprint)  
 
Planning your story  
Choose one of the stories from the folktale books in the bibliography or 
write your own. You can either do traditional or your own modern version.  
 
Write a list of all the characters and all the puppets you will need to make. 
Sometimes more than one puppet is needed, if the character is doing 
something different, such as sitting or fighting. (Working in a small group 
works well.) 
 
Also plan any scenery you may want in your story, such as mountains, 
water, forests, gardens or cities. Decide where your story will take place and 
use the information in Lessons 1 and 2 to make it realistic. 
 
Making your scenery  
Indian shadow puppets are normally made from thin leather so that some 
light can come through them. You will be making yours on tracing paper, 
colored with felt tips. Work out how big your stage will be and use the 
scenery to make the space where the play will happen.  
 
Draw out the scenes on tracing paper and color them in with felt tips. 
Include plants, flowers, buildings and dress that can be found in your area of 
choice for the setting of the story 
 
Making your puppets  
Draw out your characters on tracing paper using strong black lines around 
the edge and in any features such as faces, clothes or jewelry. Color in the 
characters with felt tips and cut them out carefully. Use the attached photo 
file for ideas.  
 
If you have a laminator, laminate each character at the top of an A4 sheet 
and leave a blank laminated space at the bottom so you can move the puppet 
around the stage without your hands showing.  
 
For older students they can attach bamboo sticks and brads at joints to ma ke 
the limbs of the puppets move.  They can also hole punch designs on the 
puppet to allow more like to shine through. 
 
Putting on the play  
Tell the story, or choose a narrator to do so as  the puppets are moved around 
on the surface of the projector, showing the play on a wall.  A more 
traditional Indian way is hold up the puppets in front of a strong light having 
the shadows being seen onto a sheet of white cotton or paper.  Either way is 
sure to please the audience. 
 
Play Indian music quietly in the background to provide an atmosphere.  
 
This website provides information about the other types of puppets used in 
various regions of India. 
http://www.puppetryindia.org/types.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
Arnold, Caroline, Madeleine Comora, and Rahul Bhushan. Taj Mahal. New York: 
Millbrook P, 2007.  
Cifarelli, Megan. India, One Nation , Many Traditions. New York, Marshall Cavendish 
Corps, 1996 
De Souza, Eunice. 101 Folktales from India. New York: Penguin Global, 2005.  
Demi. Buddha Stories. Boston: Henry Holt & Company Books For Young Readers, 
1997.  
Demi. Gandhi. New York, 2001.  
Demi. Mother Teresa. New York, 2005.  
Eddy, Susan. Mother Teresa. New York: Children's P, 2004.  
Greene, Josh. Hanuman. New York: Tricycle P, 2004.  
Heydlauff, Lisa, Sushmita Sen, and Nitin Upadhye. Going to School in India. Grand 
Rapids: Charlesbridge, Incorporated, 2005.  
Jeyaveeran, Ruth. The Road to Mumbai. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company Trade & 
Reference Division, 2004.  
Johari, Harish, Pieter Weltevrede, and Sapna Johari. Little Krishna. Boston: Bear & 
Company, 2002.  
Johari, Harish, Vatsala Sperling, and Pieter Weltevrede. How Ganesh Got His Elephant 
Head. Boston: Bear & Company, 2003.  
Johari, Harish, Vatsala Sperling, and Pieter Weltevrede. How Parvati Won the Heart of 
Shiva. New York: Bear Cub Books, 2004.  
Krishnaswami, Uma, and Jamel Akib. Monsoon. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux 
(BYR), 2003.  
Landau, Elaine. A True Book of India.  New York, Childrens Press ,2008 
Mamdani, Shelby. Cultural Journeys – Traditions from India. Austin, Texas, Steck 
Vaughan, 1999 
Nanji, Shenaaz, and Christopher Corr. Indian Tales : A Barefoot Collection. New York: 
Barefoot Books, Incorporated, 2007.  
Patel, Sanjay, and Sanjay Patel. The Little Book of Hindu Deities : From the Goddess of 
Wealth to the Sacred Cow. New York: Plume, 2006.  
Ryan, Patrick. Welcome to India. Minnesota, The Child’s World.,2008 
Sharma, Bulbul. Ramayan for Children. New York: Penguin Global, 2004.  
Souhami, Jessica, and Jessica Souhami. Rama and the Demon King : An Ancient Tale 
from India. London: Frances Lincoln Limited, 2005.  
Souhami, Jessica, and Jessica Souhami. Rama and the Demon King : An Ancient Tale 
from India. London: Frances Lincoln Limited, 2005.  
Verma, Jatinder, and Nilesh Mistry. The Story of Divaali. New York: Barefoot Books, 
Incorporated, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Children’s Magazines 
 
"Child Labor in India." Hard Day's Work. 1 Feb. 2008. 
<http://www.timeforkids.comindia>.  
"Time for Kids." India. <http://www.timeforkids.com/india>. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CULTURES OF INDIA MATRIX FROM FOLKTALES READ   TITLE MAIN CHARACTERS   SETTING GODS OR GODDESSES  ECONOMICS  AESTHETICS   CULTURE       
     
      
     
       
     
      
        
  
I hope you have enjoyed participating in this project as much as I did visiting the country of India and writing this curriculum.  I have not yet tried this unit with my students but they are very excited for me to get it finished so we can continue with our travels around the world.  There is so much more to learn about this country, India, and I hope this will just whet your appetite and you and your students will delve even deeper into this wonderful culture.  Enjoy!  If you have any questions or comments contact me at:-  joanboyle@cox.net  
